[Music]
let's go straight to downey street matt
hancock afternoon and welcome to downing
street for the daily coronavirus
briefing in keeping with the new format
um i'll go through the slides now and
then we'll take questions from members
of the public and from
journalists if we first go to slide one
slide one shows the testing capacity and
the number of
new cases the the slide the top
chart in the slide shows the number of
tests and that number of tests as of
uh the second of june was a hundred and
thirty five thousand six
hundred and forty three this is
different to testing capacity
which stands at just over 200 000
and as i said yesterday this
demonstrates
that there is spare capacity in testing
and so if you have symptoms of
coronavirus
that's a fever or a
new dry cough or a change in your sense
of taste
or smell then please do go and get a
test from nhs dot uk
forward slash coronavirus or by phoning
119. it's incredibly important
that we can trace the the virus
by ensuring that anybody with symptoms
has a test
and of course we're rolling out testing
across care homes
and making sure that staff in hospitals
get the opportunity
to be tested as well the bottom
chart on the slide shows the number of
confirmed cases
and this is 1600
as of again the 2nd of june
and brings the total of number of cases
confirmed in the uk to 277
and although the 1613 figure is slightly
higher than yesterday
we can see that the seven day rolling
average continues to fall
second slide please the data from
hospitals show that those uh
new admissions to hospitals in england
has fallen to 436
this is down from 471
on the 24th of may so just over a week
ago
and down from a high of 3121
on the 2nd of april this figure of 436
admissions to
hospitals in england with covid19
is the lowest figure since the 20th
of march and it demonstrates once again
that we are making
progress against this disease
again as yesterday then the proportion
of mechanical ventilators
uh ventilated beds that are occupied by
patients with corona
coronavirus uh remains at nine percent
uh next slide please thank you um just
like um
yesterday the number of people in
hospital continues to fall
seven thousand six hundred and seven are
now in hospital with coronavirus
and that is falling in broadly falling
in
each part of the country but for a
little bit of day-to-day movement
in some of the areas for instance as you
can see right at the end of the chart
for the northeast and yorkshire but
we keep that very closely under review
but the overriding trend as you can see
is downwards the next slide
is the number of deaths and sadly on
the uh on the 2nd of june yesterday
324 deaths with coronavirus
were recorded taking the total to 39
300 369 and we mourn
each one of these and we try to keep
these data as
accurate as possible including where we
find in in the past um
those in some cases there are deaths
where we discover that there has been
a connection to coronavirus and we add
those uh into those
uh those data so we can see that again
the trend is broadly down
but there is still some way to go and
after the weekend effect which we've
seen each weekend in terms of the number
of deaths
recorded because these this is according
to the date these have recorded
we've seen that rise on a
on most mondays and sadly the figure is
today next slide final slide please
the the final slide reports on data from
the office for national statistics which
was reported this morning
and reported a total of 48 106 deaths
in the uk where covid19 was mentioned on
the death certificate
and you can see that this again this
number is falling
the the top chart uh inc it
shows those those data and shows where
we were
on the recorded daily deaths data
for the period that corresponded to
these data coming from the ons
on the bottom chart we can see the place
of occurrence of those deaths
and you can see that both the number of
deaths and the proportion of deaths that
are in care homes both of those are
falling
27.3 percent of deaths occurred in care
homes
in the latest ons data to the week beg
the week of the
may the 22nd bringing the proportion
overall of deaths in care homes down
to 32.5
um we um we don't capture
in these charts but we do capture in a
report published by public health
england
today further data some of which are
much more troubling the phe
investigation into the way in which the
virus targets people
unequally and disproportionately
has been put on the website and this is
a particularly timely publication
because right across the world people
are angry
about racial injustice and i get that
black lives matter and i want to say
this to everyone
who works in the nhs and in social care
i value the contribution that you make
everybody
equally and i want to say it right
across society too
i want to thank you and i want you to
know that our whole country
cares about your well-being and i value
to
those who come to our country to work in
the nhs
and in social care and i love that this
country is one of the most welcoming
and tolerant and diverse
that goes for the whole country and it
goes especially for the health and care
system
as i said in the house of commons
earlier phe's investigation found that
age is the biggest risk factor for
coronavirus
next gender living in a city is a risk
and being black or from a minority
ethnic background
is also a significant risk factor there
is
much more work to do to understand
what's driving these disparities
and how the different risk factors
interact and we are absolutely
determined
to get to the bottom of this and find
ways of closing that gap
and i'm delighted that kevin badnok the
minister for equalities
will be taking this work forward working
with phe and many others
we value the contribution from everyone
to fighting this virus
everyone has a contribution to make and
of course
the thing that every single person can
do is
to make their personal contribution to
fighting this virus
in the first instance things as simple
as
washing your hands following the social
distancing rules
and of course if you have symptoms
please self-isolate immediately
and get tested to protect your friends
and family
so let's keep going and we'll get
through this
we'll now turn to questions the first
questions
are from members of the public and the
first one
is from danny from huddersfield danny
over the last week a number of measures
have been relaxed
if the r rate now begins to increase
because of this
how will you identify which measures
need to be reintroduced
to bring it back under control well that
is a really important question
i'll ask john to come in in a second the
package of measures that we've taken
we judge to be safe but of course
it depends on how people behave and so
it's important that people
follow the social distancing guidelines
even as they're changed and we'll keep
it under review
we then if we need to make changes we
can either make them at a national level
or a local level
and that'll be determined by where we
see any
outbreaks if we see them and then at a
national level
we can look we can look at right across
the board
but are and of course we've been clear
from the start
that if we need to we will bring in
further measures
but we've chosen these measures in order
to be able to relax some of the most
stringent parts of the lockdown whilst
also keeping people safe john
yes thank you secretary of state um i
think the answer danny is that it would
depend
on how the virus was coming back
um key to any public health control and
particularly for this virus is the
surveillance
information that we have uh including
special surveys but also
routine surveillance for example from
general practice um
so if it was uh if the virus came back
in a particular setting whether it was a
healthcare setting or perhaps in
in a prison or whatever then you can
undertake a lot of testing and infection
control in that setting if it comes back
more widely in particular groups
then there will be different measures
that could be taken um so it would be a
it would be in response to
the way in which the epidemiology the
counts of the numbers of cases were
increasing
it seems likely from the experience of
other countries that
if we do get recrudescence which is the
technical term of the virus
it would be patchy it would be in it
would be in localized areas and that's
why we are
keeping that under very close control
thank you
thanks very much danny the next question
is a written question from barbara
from bridport and barbara asks when will
those members of the general public
who suspect that they may have had
covert 19
be able to have an antibody test and how
will this be
rolled out um well this is another great
question barbara
and the answer is that in the first
instance the antibody tests are being
used by those in the
health and social care sector we are
delivering around 40 000 a day across
the nhs
and social care at just over 40 000 a
day on the latest
figures and then we'll roll them out
across the country we haven't yet
been able to pin down the science of
whether having antibody means
that you are at lower risk of
getting the infection again and
critically at lower risk
of transmitting the virus we've got
tests in the field to find that out
so we will be rolling out uh antibody
tests more broadly
and we've bought a huge number of them
to be able to do that
um they they they involve a phlebotomist
being able to take blood so that you can
analyze that blood uh which means that
we've got to roll them out
at the pace that we are we're trying to
expand the rate at which we've rolled
them out because i
i entirely understand your yearning to
know
thanks very much questions from the
media if we go to
rihanna croxford from the bbc rihanna
thank you secretary of state many people
from black and minority ethnic
backgrounds will be confused
why it has taken six weeks for
government to simply confirm
what studies have already shown that
they're dying with cobard 19 at
significantly higher rates
deaths from all causes in this period
have been up to four times higher on
average for people from these
backgrounds
and this hasn't been fully explained by
today's review
firstly how can you explain this
disparity which hasn't just been caused
by the virus
and why haven't you done more to protect
and support these communities and if i
could also please have a response from
professor newton and
secondly on behalf of a colleague you've
been criticized by the stats watchdog
for the presentation of the virus
testing figures
isn't that embarrassing over such an
important policy area
thanks very much um i will if i just
address the second
question first and then i will
both john and i am sure will uh answer
on the first which is so important
on the on the second question um
the the uh the way that we present the
stats is the best that we can
in the having built the testing program
so rapidly over such a short period of
time
we are working with the stats
authorities to be able to
to present these statistics in a way
that they're happy with
and to make sure that we're as
transparent as possible
i spoke to sir david norgrove today who
who is the the head of uk statistics
authority
and we'll be working with them to make
sure that these statistics
are uh are constantly improved but
the way that we present them is the is
this the simplest way of presenting
a very complex picture of the overall
five different pillars of testing and
that's the approach that we've taken
uh on the first part of your question
about
the report from public health england uh
i
i i think this is an incredibly
important area
i've been really struck by the the
the clear difference in the proportion
of people
who are dying with covert 19 from ethnic
minority
backgrounds and i wanted to get to the
bottom of it so i asked public health
england to do this work
by the end of may they've done that but
you're absolutely right that there's
much more work that needs to be done
and this report shows that so we're
asking
i've asked the equalities minister uh
kemi badnak
to take this forward and to look into
the the causes
and what further can be done and and
professor newton's been involved in this
work from the start
yeah so thank you i mean just on the
reporting of the statistics
um it's worth bearing in mind the
objective of the testing program was to
build a capacity of test
of tests to respond to the pandemic um
and
it's really what we do with the tests
rather than the numbers which are which
matter so
at the moment we have a falling number
of infections
and what we're really keen to do is to
have really high quality testing that's
delivered quickly and
and very available so um the
actually just the numbers of tests isn't
a measure of how effective the program
is it's this
whether we're testing the right people
testing them quickly and getting the
results back so
we're happy to report the numbers in any
way uh in any way that
that we're that we're asked to um on
the review is a is an important piece of
work um there was a great deal in it
a lot of different factors looked at
normally a report like this would take
us a good six months so
we've actually produced the sort of
analysis that in a relatively short time
um as you say some of these data were
already available so the
office of national statistics and other
research studies have already published
so
we've confirmed that and it's important
to have confirmation from a number of
sources
as you say we weren't able to look at
all the potential
explanations but in particular you
mentioned the
all-cause mortality being four times
higher or actually 3.9 times higher in
in black men for example than uh uh than
the normal times
and it's raised by 1.7 times in in white
men
and and two i think two point two 2.9 in
asian men so
there are a number of statistics in
there it's quite a long report and
there's a great deal of background
information and detailed information
that we think will be helpful
what we'd really like to do now is to
get a lot of discussion about all these
elements with in particular with all of
the people involved and the various
groups involved in responding to it
so we think the report will be helpful
some of it was available before but
there's quite a lot of new information
there
and it's not it's not easy to
to go directly from the analysis to
making recommendations and we need to
get the report widely disseminated and
widely discussed before
i think deciding exactly what needs to
be done but
clearly there are some fairly obvious
conclusions that can be drawn even from
the
data that we have can i please follow up
on that yes of course yeah
you know fancy thank you for
acknowledging that black lives matter in
your opening speech but
lots of people are already going back to
work scared that they're not being
protected
and there'll be no measures announced
today as we had expected
perhaps people in place to protect them
can you say anything
to these communities and if not can you
give us a time frame or a deadline
when they will get recommendations about
how they can protect themselves
going forward considering that this risk
won't be going away
yes absolutely the number one thing i'd
say
is that for anybody in a higher risk
group
the most important thing to do is
stringently to follow
the social distancing guides including
the work on social distancing at work
that's been published so there is
specific guidance for social distancing
in the workplace
so for all of the different high-risk
categories
that the data demonstrate it's really
important that
people follow those social distance and
guidelines
very stringently we've been very clear
about this from the start
about those who either have a medical
condition
and as the phe report says age is the
number one
risk factor because around
90 percent of deaths are amongst the
over 65s
um so the the the
the answer the direct answer to the
question is this
is the same as to everybody but with
more emphasis which is that
the social distancing is the best way to
keep yourself safe
and keep others safe alongside
the hygiene and washing your hands and
making sure that if you have symptoms
get a test and i totally understand the
concerns that people have and i
understand the
um the anger that's that people feel
more about racial injustice more broadly
and i share it
and we want to tackle it we i fully
acknowledge that
and it is very very important that we
address that
as i'm trying to do within the nhs and
social care that i'm responsible for and
i think we need to do
across society as a whole thanks very
much ryan is that okay yeah
emily morgan from itv hi
um if i can pick up on something that
rihanna said you launched this review
secretary of state this review published
today with a huge fanfare to look at how
curved 19 was affecting
ethnic minorities one of the objectives
to the review was to make
recommendations
where are those recommendations and will
you be
publishing any anytime soon well
absolutely we need to take go through
the next stage of work
um to make sure that we take into
account
all of the different considerations for
instance the phe report
sets out that it doesn't take into
account co-morbidities
different occupations because different
people in different occupations have
different risk factors
and of course the
health other health factors like obesity
we've got to make sure
all of those are taken into account and
and scientifically
rigorously understand the causes behind
the
the data that are clearly shown today
and take that
and take the lessons from there john
well yes thank you i mean i think the
recommendations are there are
recommendations there but they're
perhaps they're they're more to do with
the fact that these are important data
for people to be aware of because as
secretary of state has said i think even
understanding the levels of risk
associated with different factors
is itself important in designing uh
programs to protect people in fact the
nhs has already
uh started the process of risk
assessment for staff using these sorts
of data so
so there are there are recommendations
there but um there is
there are still some questions i mean
what we do show is that there's no
simple if you take i mean there's a lot
more than just the uh ethnic
differences in the report there are
differences to do with levels of
deprivation and where people live and
occupation and so on and all these
causes are the causes of of health
inequalities
anyway and actually what the report
emphasizes is the fact that
what covert 19 has done is to emphasize
the existing health inequalities in the
country
and it shows us again that we need to
address those inequalities
whether they're to do with deprivation
or to do with people's
um people's background so in fact the
to some extent the the the
recommendations that have been made
before about similar issues still apply
what we have
uh uh what we have put forward is uh
some data that can be used as secretary
of state mentioned the
uh the the relevant minister and the uh
the race disparities unit who have
already
looked at the data and i think we will
be seeing some recommendations coming
out but it is important that those
recommendations are
widely discussed with a lot of other
groups not just from
public health england but we we think
the data are going to be important for
those processes
thank you yes of course yeah you
mentioned
risk assessments and obviously risk
assessments are now happening for ethnic
minority members of staff
in healthcare but what about the rest of
the population given that we know
that ethnic minorities are being
disproportionately affected by covid19
shouldn't all
ethnic minorities now be put in an at
risk category to protect them
well if if i may say i mean i mean the
the key point of the study is it shows
although
clearly outcomes are worse for people in
in
black and minority ethnic groups
and that is not necessarily because of
their ethnicity exactly as you say
it may be related to their occupation or
to other
other reasons why they might be at
higher level of exposure so
one just has to be a little bit careful
uh
in doing that risk assessment no one has
to look at the causes
of increased risk which may be as much
to do with
other factors not necessarily someone's
background per se
although it is there is probably an
element of that as well
so it just it the report if nothing else
emphasizes the complexity
of what we're seeing so really we're
urging people not to
jump to conclusions and and institute
institute measures which are not really
justified
by the by the data so there's an element
of caution in our
in our results as well as obviously
pointing out these obvious
inequalities thank you thanks emily
next question is from ben kentish at lbc
ben
thank you secretary good afternoon and i
wanted to ask you about the ons
figures this morning because two months
or so ago at the start of the lockdown
the government was predicting a death
toll of between
seven thousand and twenty thousand the
ons this morning
revealing that the total excess
mortality since the end of march
is three times that and more than three
times that at about 62
000. i wondered if you had any um a
sense of why you thought that was on
there or what lessons we could learn
about that for the future and if i could
just one for professor newton
testing capacity has increased
significantly but still about a third of
it each day is getting unused
just wonder how you plan to use that
spare capacity
and whether it could be used for people
who have been told to isolate by the
track and trace test and trace system
without symptoms to decide whether or
not they do indeed have the virus thank
you
thanks very much on the first question
i'll take the first question then ask
professor newton to answer the second on
the first question
we didn't make a prediction of the
impact of
this disease other than right at the
start when there were
scientific predictions made which have
been published showing
that unmitigated with no measures uh the
death toll would have been around half a
million uh and that led to
a whole um a whole series of changes
including the
social distancing and effectively
the lockdown because that was
unacceptably high
and we are completely and fully uh
transparent about the
the impact of the disease and i welcome
the
ons's uh vigilance in measuring it
um and um the you know the good news
from the ons stats this morning
are that the number of cases
the number of deaths sorry is coming
down uh and also the fact that the
proportion of deaths in care homes
is coming down uh big given that that's
been a a very
big focus of attention um
professor thank you very much so it's a
very good question about what are the
priorities for the testing program so
there are three
priorities the first is to support the
test and trace
program and the secretary of state has
said we are really keen for anybody
with symptoms that might be coronavirus
to come forward have a test
and so that we can give a definitive
answer and if they are positive they can
be entered into the
test and trace program and i should say
actually we were asked yesterday about
some of the statistics but there are
thousands of uh people already who've
positive tested positive
who've been successfully fed into the
test and trace program
and they have been using their using the
online tool
and identifying contacts and there are
thousands of contacts who've been
successfully identified and agreed
to self-isolate so that program is going
well we don't
in fact recommend testing for people who
don't have symptoms
because if you uh if you don't have
symptoms it is unlikely to be positive
and even if somebody who's incubating
the virus
the test may well be negative so if you
have an if you have a test
uh during um if you're a contact and
during your 14 days of self-isolation if
you have a test
and it's negative you still have to
complete the 14 days isolation
so there is there is little utility in
in offering tests to people who are
contacts unless they develop symptoms
when of course it is worthwhile
the second priority is to support the
nhs in infection control and other
settings like care homes
so we're doing a lot of testing of staff
to make sure that it's safe for people
to be
in a care setting or in the nhs so
that's a substantial requirement
the numbers of positive tests and
particularly asymptomatic positive tests
in those settings are coming down
so it and we are learning from those
results
to design uh infection control programs
for the future
and then thirdly we're using the test to
support really large-scale surveys so
every now and again you see a blip
in the numbers of tests done when uh
when we do a lot of tests for
a survey whether it's for the office
national statistics or one of the other
the imperial college survey and so those
are the three priorities for testing
and we are using a good proportion of
the test and of course then there are
the antibody tests
which are being rolled out first in
health and care staff to understand how
the infection has spread
let's just come back on your answer
secretary of state yeah of course yeah
thank you because there were there were
forecasts published by members of sage
neil ferguson for example and he said
today that the uk had been much more
heavily affected by the virus
than expected so i did wonder if there
was any analysis going on and if you
could
share any of that about why that might
be and how we could avoid
if there was a second peak or a future
epidemic how we can avoid those same
things happening again well it's
undoubtedly true that we've had
a very significant impact from this
virus there's
no doubt about that and we've been
learning all the way through it
how best to deal with that in fact the
test and trace system
that we've built over the past few weeks
and that's been up and running for the
past five days
is one of the lessons that comes out of
it the absolute vital importance
of having a system that is big enough to
be able to
uh to to trace as many
of those who tested positive as possible
and this in fact ties in with a
an additional answer i was going to give
to your second question
which is that professor newton gave the
long answer if you like
the short answer to the question of the
gap between tests done and capacity
is that we have spare capacity this is a
good thing
but i would urge lbc listeners and
everybody else in the country to use the
capacity if they need it if you need a
test you can get one
straightforwardly go on the website and
you are not only
protecting yourself but you're also
helping us to trace the virus
and control it and therefore keep the
country safe
thanks very much ben uh george parker
from the ft
george thank you it's a question about
the government's plan for a blanket
quarantine a 14-day quarantine on people
arriving
from overseas question first of all to
professor newsome what is the scientific
rationale
of having a quarantine against people
coming in for example from a country
like greece which has very low levels of
coronavirus into this country
and would you support the idea of an air
bridge between countries with lower
infection
infection rates in britain into the uk a
question to you secretary of state you
said on may the 12th
that people wouldn't be taking overseas
holidays
this year is that still your advice
uh well do you want to go first well i
should say by the way that i'm not a
member of sage and it would be sage
whose advice is is the basis for this
but the principles are
are clear that um obviously we uh just
like
in this country if somebody might be at
risk of having the virus
we need them to be isolated during any
period when they might be
infectious and if people are coming into
the country
then they already have to be treated as
an unknown and therefore there's a
quarantine now
if uh there are two reasons why we might
not do that that would be if
the risk of them having the virus uh
when they come from another country
is so low that we would just take the
chance that the chances of them being
becoming infectious are very low
and i think at the moment the judgment
is that it's too early to say that and
therefore it's better to be
cautious for people traveling and
secondly
if we were if we are able to very
quickly
respond uh with a test and trace program
uh then we could cover it in that way so
if we
if travelers are able to um uh be tested
and self-isolate in response to
uh in response to contact tracing just
like
a if you like a domestic new case then
that would also be
a way of dealing with it at the moment i
think caution
is won the day and sage's advice is that
quarantine
is appropriate but as i say it's not my
direct responsibility but i'm sure those
are the principles on which
on which the advice is being given
thanks
george on the specifics i i was actually
asked this uh i think
uh late last week and i said i was more
optimistic
than previously but clearly the number
one priority is keeping the public
safe and that is that is the overriding
principle
and it has been throughout this uh and
uh hence
many of the changes that we've brought
in the next question is from sarah
o'grady yes of course sorry
you want to come back quick follow up on
that sure um
given the uk has one of the highest
infection rates
in europe can you give any indication of
which other european countries
are interested in the idea of an air
bridge with the uk
well this air bridge idea has been
floated
and i know there's been a lot of
discussion about it and i know that some
countries
have been mentioned in the media um
but that is a piece of work that's being
done by the home office and the dft
and um i'm not going to tread on the
toes of my colleagues no matter
how tempting it is um thanks george um
the next question is from sarah o'grady
uh
from the daily express sarah hello there
my question is to you secretary of state
um the spotlight has shown
on the pressures faced by our social
care system
through this um corona virus pandemic
lag
never before and i would like to know
please so i can tell
readers of the daily express what are
your plans and what is
your time frame for the long
promised radical reform of social care
well i'm glad to say sarah that we
absolutely
need to make those reforms to
social care that have been in my view
pushed to the side for too long we made
clear commitments in the manifesto which
was only back in december
and we have been working on that
uh on that piece of work even
during the coronavirus crisis it's
incredibly important to me that we put
social care on a sustainable footing and
i think one of the positive things
amid the uh the terrible things that
have happened during this crisis
is that people have recognized social
care as for just how important
it is and i think everybody who works in
social care
has seen the whole country value them we
need to follow that up
with reforms to the way that social care
is supported
to make sure that more people get that
dignity in their older age
and the people of working age who are in
social care get the support that they
need
so i am i'm very um i'm i am very
keen to i'm determined to push forward
the
social care reforms that i know so many
readers of the daily express are
interested in
can you give me an example please of one
of those reforms
could you give us an idea of perhaps the
time frame
well the time frame has been clear which
is that we've got to get these reforms
done
um in this parliament and the prime
minister's previously said that we'd
get them set out this year that was
before coronavirus we'll still try to do
that but it is not straightforward
um and what i can say
is that the crisis itself has
demonstrated many of the reforms that
are needed
like closer working and collaboration
between
health and social care like the in
like increased financial support which
would which we'd already committed to
for social care
and then we put more in uh during the
crisis and making sure that some of the
injustices in social care
are taken away especially about how it's
paid for
thanks very much the final question is
from
uh vic matune from the voice vic
secretary of state many thanks um i'd
like to ask two questions if i may and
address them also to uh mr newton
given the disproportionate way in which
covered 19
has affected people from black asian and
minority ethnic communities
there's understandably a lot of concern
a lot of anticipation about this report
the public health england report
and what it might say however the
disappointing
lack of recommendations is is certainly
going to
you know affect many uh already we've
had a number of
uh emails from readers of the voice
citing this
as another example of government
indifference to the kind of equal
inequalities that you mentioned earlier
on in your
address how will the government
address and reassure members of those
communities that this isn't just another
report the second question i'd like to
ask as you know the statistics
show a clear link between the um
people working in public uh
frontline communities frontline jobs and
also their chances of
contracting covid19 many people from bme
communities
are in front-line jobs such as health
healthcare
transport social care but local
authorities around the country
have been very quick to protect bme
employees through things like
risk assessments how will the government
follow their lead
well thanks very much vic and i
in a way the second question the second
question answers the first
in the we've already taken action
because it's been clear right from the
start you know i remember that the first
four deaths of doctors were
all people from black and asian minority
ethnic backgrounds
um i think that i think three of the
four
had come to the uk to serve in the nhs
and it really struck me and this was
right at the start
um that there was clearly a disparity
and we've seen that disparity
and i think in your second question
you've touched on some of the
reasons and we need to we need to
do more work which is why we've
published this and are saying we do it
we're taking it further
because the link to the occupations that
that people do
is an important part of this conundrum
um and putting in place risk assessments
for people who are in high risk
occupations
has been something that we've already
been doing uh the work on
what we need to find out and we don't
yet know from this report
is what over and above
the impacts of being in a certain
occupation like for instance as you say
being more
on the front line and one of the biggest
impacts is of p
is of people who work in transport where
you can't isolate so like taxi drivers
and how much of the disproportionate
number of deaths that we've seen from
people from bme communities
are due to the the fact that there's
a higher proportion of people from those
communities who work
in the sorts of occupations where
the risk is greater um and how much is
down to
uh for instance the um the
differences in uh in housing because we
know that urban areas are more badly hit
than
rural areas and so it's the wider
co-determinants that we need to get to
the bottom of
and that's the work that along with uh
phe that kemi vadnak
will be leading in the next stage to
make sure we we look as broadly as
possible
and all the way through this we've been
putting in place the
actions that we think have been needed
from the evidence that we've got
um and and and we we need to keep doing
that
john oh thank you so yeah i mean the the
so the purpose of the report was to try
and get
every bit of information we could from
the existing data try and understand
how the different factors work together
so not not just
uh ethnicity but the other factors which
are often working alongside ethnicity
and many people of course suffer from
multiple
disadvantages as well um so we're trying
to put all that into
into context and and really present
it as clearly as we could and it is
complicated even
after we've done the analyses it is
still a complicated picture
so trying to get that absolutely clear
so that people could then take it
forward
and develop the right recommendations
and i think there's a
the the way we would the way we would do
this is uh
it is such a way that the people who uh
we're
trying to put the information into the
hands of people who can use it to make a
difference
and that's often it's not us as the
public health authority it's
more likely that you know the people
that you you work with and know
who will know how to use these data to
make a difference to people's lives
so there's a whole range of people who
need to contribute to these
recommendations certainly not just us as
public health england
so we've presented we've done the very
best we can to understand
what the data tell us already there are
some things that we still don't know
from the data and there's a
research program that um has been kicked
off to try and
try and elucidate some of the genetic
analyses and some we haven't done yet
but we've done the very best we can to
make those data available to people
so that really really good
recommendations can be developed which
will really make a difference
to the outcome but thank you thank you
thank you
yeah if i if i may ask so you mentioned
that there will be a follow-up uh report
inquiry do you have any timelines
as to when that follow-up report you
mentioned it will be headed by
kenny baden up do you have any timelines
as to
when that might be obviously the concern
on this issue
is that you know given the scale of the
issue it's just
report after report and obviously there
are
many people in bme communities who
really
want to see some serious action and some
serious recommendations
yeah i look i get that yearning and um
we will put action in place
as soon as we can we won't wait for a
report and i've got to talk to kemi
about a timeline for it
and so i'll have to get back to you on
that one but i totally understand the
the urgency the importance and and the
sensitivity of getting this right
thanks vic thank you very much indeed
that ends today's
downing street coronavirus daily
[Music]
briefing
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news